Add TLE blog post. (#13689)
supabase/supabase: apps/www/_blog/2023-04-14-pg-tle.mdx

---

> title: 'User-managed Trusted Language Extensions for Supabase and RDS'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'User-managed Trusted Language Extensions for RDS and Supabase'
```

launchweek: 7
tags:
  - launch-week

>   - tle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - postgres
```

date: '2023-04-14'
to_depth: 3
author: michel,oli_rice
image: launch-week-7/day-2-edge-runtime/edge-runtime-og.png

> thumb: launch-week-7/day-2-edge-runtime/edge-runtime-thumb.jpeg

Reviewer: todo: update these

---

# User-managed Trusted Language Extensions for Supabase and RDS

> ## Summary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Summary
```
remove heading

> Most PostgreSQL cloud providers, such as Supabase and AWS RDS, do not allow users to install Postgres extensions into their databases until they have been rigorously vetted. Because of this, many useful Postgres extensions cannot be used on cloud platforms. However, the RDS has developed a new kind of extension called a **Trusted Language Extension** has been introduced that allows extensions written in Trusted Languages to be created from any database user without requiring filesystem access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most PostgreSQL cloud providers, such as Supabase and AWS RDS, do not allow users to install Postgres extensions into their databases until they have been rigorously vetted. Because of this, many useful Postgres extensions cannot be used on cloud platforms. To solve this, the RDS team has developed a new kind of extension called a **Trusted Language Extension** (TLE). 

A TLE is a Postgres extension that is written in a Trusted Language, and it can be installed in any Postgres provider that has the [pg_tle](https://github.com/aws/pg_tle) extension installed. The goal is to make more extensions available to developers, even if your database is hosted on the cloud.
```

> # Introduction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# How Postgres extensions work 
```

Reviewer 2: updated in latest commit

Before exploring what a Trusted Language Extension is, let’s cover the basics of Postgres Extensions and the notion of “Trusted Languages” in general.

> A Postgres Extension is a bundle of SQL and other code, primarily [Data Definition Language](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl.html) (DDL) code installed into the server’s filesystem, and instantiated in a database with the `[CREATE EXTENSION](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createextension.html)` command. This code can contain any SQL, but almost always includes additional function objects created with the `[CREATE FUNCTION](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createfunction.html)` DDL statement that expose the core features of the extension to the database in some programming language, including an external library function written in C.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Postgres Extension is a bundle of SQL and other code, primarily [Data Definition Language](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/ddl.html) (DDL) code installed into the server’s filesystem, and instantiated in a database with the [`CREATE EXTENSION`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createextension.html) command. This code can contain any SQL, but almost always includes additional function objects created with the [`CREATE FUNCTION`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createfunction.html) DDL statement that expose the core features of the extension to the database in some programming language, including an external library function written in C.
```

> Extensions provide a wide variety of additional functionality to Postgres and allow third party feature distribution, like new data types, storage engines, helper functions, even entire language runtimes like Javascript or Python, without requiring changes to the Postgres database itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extensions provide a variety of additional functionality and allow third-party feature distribution without requiring changes to the Postgres database itself - including new data types, storage engines, helper functions, and even entire language runtimes like Javascript or Python.
```

Some examples of popular Postgres extensions include:

- [PostGIS](https://postgis.net/): for working with geospatial data
- [Timescale DB](https://www.timescale.com/): for working with timeseries data
- [Citus](https://www.citusdata.com/): for working with distributed tables
- [plv8](https://plv8.github.io/): for running Node.js inside Postgres
- [pgsodium](https://github.com/michelp/pgsodium): for accessing the libsodium encryption API

> Before extensions can be created, they must first be installed on the filesystem of the database server, which is an important security measure because extensions in some cases may require external libraries and can interact with the internals of Postgres. Their installation is something that requires careful consideration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before extensions can be created, they must first be installed on the filesystem of the database server, which is an important security measure because in some cases extensions may require external libraries and can interact with Postgres internals. Their installation is something that requires careful consideration.
```

## Trusted vs Untrusted

> As mentioned, extensions often include function objects created with `CREATE FUNCTION`. Many extensions provide functions whose implementation is written in C, and creating them in a database means that the compiled C code is “dynamically linked” into your running Postgres process. These dynamically-loaded libraries can now access every aspect of your running database process, right down to raw memory. They are essentially database superusers on steroids. Because of this, C is an “untrusted language” and installing extensions written in C requires filesystem access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many extensions provide functions whose implementation is written in C, and creating them in a database means that the compiled C code is “dynamically linked” into your running Postgres process. These dynamically-loaded libraries can now access every aspect of your running database process, right down to raw memory. They are essentially database superusers on steroids. Because of this, C is an “untrusted language” and installing extensions written in C requires filesystem access.
```

## Trusted Language Extensions

Near the end of 2022, we got a surprise gift from the team at Amazon Web Services, a new Postgres extension called `pg_tle`, that allows you to **Trusted Language Extensions (TLEs).** A TLE is just like a regular Postgres extension, except that **does not need to be installed on the server filesystem** it is written in a **trusted language** you can install extensions from any database client using the function `pgtle.install_extension()`, just like you can create other objects like tables and views.

Of course, TLEs _must_ be written in trusted languages as described above, hence the name, so no extensions that are written in C can be TLEs. There are still many extensions that are already written in trusted languages, and soon many more to come with some exciting progress in more performant trusted languages like [pl/rust](https://github.com/tcdi/plrust) which recently reached an official 1.0.0 version release. By removing the constraint that extensions must be installed on the server filesystem, TLEs open up a whole new world of possibilities for packaging and distributing new and modular functionality for Postgres.

> pg_tle is available right now on new Supabase projects, and on Amazon RDS for Postgres 14.5 and higher. At Supabase we also include an extension called [pgsql-http](https://github.com/pramsey/pgsql-http), which lets you make HTTP calls from SQL to REST APIs. So, naturally putting two and two together, we thought it would be cool to see if it’s possible to install TLEs from a REST API using only SQL!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pg_tle is available on new Supabase projects and on Amazon RDS for Postgres 14.5 and higher. Supabase also includes an extension called [pgsql-http](https://github.com/pramsey/pgsql-http) for making HTTP calls from SQL to REST APIs. So, naturally putting two and two together, we thought it would be cool to see if it’s possible to install TLEs from a REST API using only SQL!
```

> You can, and we’ll show you how downloading TLEs directly into your database turns out not only to be possible but also very powerful! In this blog post we will present a prototype for this idea, and our future plans to extend TLEs into a full _community ecosystem_ of installable packages, just like many other languages enjoy. pip for Python, npm for Javascript, cargo for Rust, cpan for Perl, and now dbdev for Postgres!

Reviewer: I think these two paragraphs should go below "The Extension Shortfall" - because it leads directly onto the dbdev paragraphs

After AWS released `pg_tle`, we realized immediately how powerful the tool is, and how it will change the way people release and install trusted extensions forever. After reaching out, we started collaborating with the TLE team at AWS and exchanging ideas and resources to further promote TLEs in both our database platform and theirs. By both Supabase and AWS providing the TLE extension in their respective Postgres platforms, we are unifying a standard package platform across two of the largest Postgres cloud providers in the world. We hope that other Postgres cloud providers will get on the bandwagon and provide TLE support as well, so that extension developers can leverage a large community base that greatly multiplies the reach of their efforts.

> ## Installing dbdev with Migrations

Reviewer: perhaps we should just link to the dbdev blog post? Make this one shorter

Reviewer 2: maybe one better.. just link to database.dev "get going now.." sort of thing
